README.md, before:

# علوم القرآن | Quranic Sciences Platform

[![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.100+-green.svg)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/Docker-Ready-blue.svg)](https://www.docker.com/)

A comprehensive AI-powered platform for Quranic Sciences (علوم القرآن) featuring semantic search, comparative tafsir analysis, and the ten Quranic readings (القراءات العشر).

---

## Features

### Core Modules

| Module | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| **القراءات العشر** | Ten Quranic readings with differences, audio comparisons, and scholarly analysis |
| **التفاسير المقارنة** | Side-by-side comparison of 7+ classical tafsirs |
| **أسباب النزول** | Revelation contexts with sources and authentication |
| **البحث الدلالي** | AI-powered semantic search across 50,000+ vectors |

### AI Capabilities

- **Semantic Search**: Find verses by meaning, not just keywords
- **RAG-based Q&A**: Ask questions in Arabic, get answers with Quranic citations
- **Contextual Understanding**: Retrieves relevant tafsir, asbab, and related verses
- **Streaming Responses**: Real-time AI responses with source attribution

---

## Screenshots

### Quran Browser
![Quran Surah View](images/Quran_surah.png)

### القراءات العشر (Ten Readings)
![Qiraat Differences](images/Qiraat.png)

### التفاسير المقارنة (Comparative Tafsir)
![Tafsir Comparison](images/tafsir.png)

### أسباب النزول (Revelation Contexts)
![Asbab al-Nuzul](images/asbab_nzol.png)

### الإعراب (Grammatical Analysis)
![I'rab Analysis](images/eraab.png)

### AI Assistant
![AI Assistant](images/AI.png)

---

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                         Client (Browser)                        │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                  │
                                  ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    FastAPI Application                          │
│  ┌─────────────┐  ┌─────────────┐  ┌─────────────────────────┐  │
│  │   Web UI    │  │  REST API   │  │    AI Endpoints         │  │
│  │  (Jinja2)   │  │   /api/*    │  │  /api/ai/ask/stream     │  │
│  └─────────────┘  └─────────────┘  └─────────────────────────┘  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
          │                   │                    │
          ▼                   ▼                    ▼
┌──────────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐  ┌─────────────────────────┐
│    SQLite DB     │  │    Qdrant    │  │   OpenAI-Compatible     │
│  (280MB, local)  │  │ Vector Store │  │  - LLM (chat)           │
│                  │  │  50K vectors │  │  - Embeddings model     │
└──────────────────┘  └──────────────┘  └─────────────────────────┘
```

---

## Tech Stack

| Layer | Technology |
|-------|------------|
| **Backend** | Python 3.10+, FastAPI, Uvicorn, Gunicorn |
| **Database** | SQLite (structured data), Qdrant (vectors) |
| **AI/ML** | OpenAI-compatible API (LLM + Embeddings) |
| **Frontend** | Jinja2 Templates, Bootstrap 5, Vanilla JS |
| **Deployment** | Docker, Cloud Run / Kubernetes |

---

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- OpenAI-compatible API access (for AI features)

### Local Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/uloom-quran.git
cd uloom-quran

# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/Mac
# venv\Scripts\activate   # Windows

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Set environment variables
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your Azure OpenAI credentials

# Initialize database (downloads and populates data)
python scripts/init_database.py

# Run the server
python run.py
```

Open http://localhost:8080 in your browser.

### Docker Deployment

```bash
# Build the image
docker build -t uloom-quran .

# Run with environment variables
docker run -p 8080:8080 \
  -e OPENAI_API_BASE=your-api-endpoint \
  -e OPENAI_API_KEY=your-key \
  -e QDRANT_URL=your-qdrant-url \
  uloom-quran
```

### Cloud Deployment

```bash
# Build and push to container registry
docker build -t uloom-quran .
docker tag uloom-quran your-registry/uloom-quran
docker push your-registry/uloom-quran

# Deploy with your preferred cloud provider
# (Cloud Run, Kubernetes, AWS ECS, etc.)
```

---

## Configuration

Create a `.env` file based on `.env.example`:

```bash
# Environment
ENV=production

# OpenAI-Compatible API (required for AI features)
OPENAI_API_BASE=https://api.openai.com/v1
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-api-key
CHAT_MODEL=gpt-4o
EMBEDDING_MODEL=text-embedding-ada-002

# Qdrant Vector Database
QDRANT_URL=http://localhost:6333

# Server
PORT=8080
```

---

## API Reference

### Quran Endpoints

```bash
# List all surahs
GET /api/quran/surahs

# Get surah details with verses
GET /api/quran/surah/{surah_id}

# Get specific verse
GET /api/quran/verse/{surah_id}/{ayah}

# Search verses
GET /api/quran/search?q=الرحمن
```

### Tafsir Endpoints

```bash
# Get all tafsirs for a verse
GET /api/tafsir/verse/{surah_id}/{ayah}

# Compare specific tafsirs
GET /api/tafsir/compare/{surah_id}/{ayah}?tafsirs=tabari,kathir,qurtubi
```

### Qiraat Endpoints

```bash
# Get qiraat differences for a verse
GET /api/qiraat/verse/{surah_id}/{ayah}

# Get all differences in a surah
GET /api/qiraat/surah/{surah_id}

# Search qiraat by keyword
GET /api/qiraat/search?q=إمالة
```

### AI Endpoints

```bash
# Semantic search (streaming)
GET /api/ai/ask/stream?q=ما معنى الصبر في القرآن

# AI health check
GET /api/ai/health
```

### Example Response

```json
{
  "type": "sources",
  "sources": [
    {
      "type": "verse",
      "reference": "2:153",
      "text": "يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اسْتَعِينُوا بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلَاةِ",
      "score": 0.89
    }
  ]
}
```

---

## Database Schema

### Core Tables

| Table | Records | Description |
|-------|---------|-------------|
| `surahs` | 114 | Chapter metadata |
| `verses` | 6,236 | Uthmani text with keys |
| `tafsir_books` | 7 | Tafsir sources |
| `tafsir_entries` | 43,652 | Commentary per verse |
| `asbab_nuzul` | 677 | Revelation contexts |
| `qurra` | 10 | Ten readers |
| `ruwat` | 20 | Twenty transmitters |
| `qiraat_variants` | 1,500+ | Reading differences |

### Vector Collections (Qdrant)

| Collection | Vectors | Description |
|------------|---------|-------------|
| `quran_verses` | 6,236 | Verse embeddings |
| `tafsir_texts` | 43,652 | Tafsir embeddings |
| `asbab_nuzul` | 677 | Asbab embeddings |
| **Total** | **50,565** | Semantic search index |

---

## Available Tafsirs

| Tafsir | Author | Era |
|--------|--------|-----|
| جامع البيان | الإمام الطبري | 310 هـ |
| تفسير القرآن العظيم | الإمام ابن كثير | 774 هـ |
| معالم التنزيل | الإمام البغوي | 516 هـ |
| الجامع لأحكام القرآن | الإمام القرطبي | 671 هـ |
| تيسير الكريم الرحمن | الشيخ السعدي | 1376 هـ |
| التحرير والتنوير | الشيخ ابن عاشور | 1393 هـ |
| الوسيط | الشيخ طنطاوي | 1431 هـ |

---

## Project Structure

```
uloom-quran/
├── src/
│   ├── api/                 # FastAPI application
│   │   ├── main.py          # App entry point
│   │   └── routes/          # API endpoints
│   ├── ai/                  # AI services
│   │   ├── config.py        # LLM & embedding config
│   │   └── services/        # RAG, embeddings, Qdrant
│   ├── scrapers/            # Data collection scripts
│   └── services/            # Business logic
├── templates/               # Jinja2 HTML templates
├── static/                  # CSS, JS assets
├── scripts/                 # Database & indexing scripts
├── db/                      # SQLite database & schemas
├── k8s/                     # Kubernetes manifests
├── Dockerfile               # Container definition
├── requirements.txt         # Python dependencies
└── .env.example             # Environment template
```

---

## Data Sources & Attribution

| Source | Content | License |
|--------|---------|---------|
| [Quran-Data](https://github.com/rn0x/Quran-Data) | Quran JSON with metadata | MIT |
| [tafseer-sqlite-db](https://github.com/Mr-DDDAlKilanny/tafseer-sqlite-db) | Arabic tafsirs | Open |
| [tafsir_api](https://github.com/spa5k/tafsir_api) | Additional tafsirs | MIT |
| [nquran.com](https://www.nquran.com/) | القراءات العشر | Educational |

---

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

### Development Setup

```bash
# Install dev dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run with hot reload
uvicorn src.api.main:app --reload --port 8080

# Run tests
pytest tests/
```

---

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

**Note**: The Quranic text and scholarly content are in the public domain. Please respect the licensing of individual data sources listed above.

---

## Acknowledgments

- The Quran open-source community for data contributions
- Classical scholars whose tafsirs are preserved digitally
- Open-source AI/ML community

---

<div align="center">

**Built with reverence for the Holy Quran**

للتواصل والاقتراحات | For feedback and suggestions

</div>

Commit message:

Fix Docker build by initializing database schema during build
The Docker build was failing because it tried to copy db/uloom_quran.db
which doesn't exist in the repository. This commit fixes the issue by:

- Adding sqlite3 to system dependencies in Dockerfile
- Copying database schema files (db/ directory) instead of the database file
- Initializing an empty database with schema during Docker build
- Running all three schema files: schema.sql, usul_qiraat_schema.sql, and basmala_schema.sql
- Updating README.md with notes about database initialization and data population options

The database is now created with the proper structure during build time,
and can be populated with data either before building or by mounting a
pre-populated database at runtime.

Fixes the 'db/uloom_quran.db: not found' error during docker build.

README.md, after:

# علوم القرآن | Quranic Sciences Platform

[![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.100+-green.svg)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/Docker-Ready-blue.svg)](https://www.docker.com/)

A comprehensive AI-powered platform for Quranic Sciences (علوم القرآن) featuring semantic search, comparative tafsir analysis, and the ten Quranic readings (القراءات العشر).

---

## Features

### Core Modules

| Module | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| **القراءات العشر** | Ten Quranic readings with differences, audio comparisons, and scholarly analysis |
| **التفاسير المقارنة** | Side-by-side comparison of 7+ classical tafsirs |
| **أسباب النزول** | Revelation contexts with sources and authentication |
| **البحث الدلالي** | AI-powered semantic search across 50,000+ vectors |

### AI Capabilities

- **Semantic Search**: Find verses by meaning, not just keywords
- **RAG-based Q&A**: Ask questions in Arabic, get answers with Quranic citations
- **Contextual Understanding**: Retrieves relevant tafsir, asbab, and related verses
- **Streaming Responses**: Real-time AI responses with source attribution

---

## Screenshots

### Quran Browser
![Quran Surah View](images/Quran_surah.png)

### القراءات العشر (Ten Readings)
![Qiraat Differences](images/Qiraat.png)

### التفاسير المقارنة (Comparative Tafsir)
![Tafsir Comparison](images/tafsir.png)

### أسباب النزول (Revelation Contexts)
![Asbab al-Nuzul](images/asbab_nzol.png)

### الإعراب (Grammatical Analysis)
![I'rab Analysis](images/eraab.png)

### AI Assistant
![AI Assistant](images/AI.png)

---

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                         Client (Browser)                        │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                  │
                                  ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    FastAPI Application                          │
│  ┌─────────────┐  ┌─────────────┐  ┌─────────────────────────┐  │
│  │   Web UI    │  │  REST API   │  │    AI Endpoints         │  │
│  │  (Jinja2)   │  │   /api/*    │  │  /api/ai/ask/stream     │  │
│  └─────────────┘  └─────────────┘  └─────────────────────────┘  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
          │                   │                    │
          ▼                   ▼                    ▼
┌──────────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐  ┌─────────────────────────┐
│    SQLite DB     │  │    Qdrant    │  │   OpenAI-Compatible     │
│  (280MB, local)  │  │ Vector Store │  │  - LLM (chat)           │
│                  │  │  50K vectors │  │  - Embeddings model     │
└──────────────────┘  └──────────────┘  └─────────────────────────┘
```

---

## Tech Stack

| Layer | Technology |
|-------|------------|
| **Backend** | Python 3.10+, FastAPI, Uvicorn, Gunicorn |
| **Database** | SQLite (structured data), Qdrant (vectors) |
| **AI/ML** | OpenAI-compatible API (LLM + Embeddings) |
| **Frontend** | Jinja2 Templates, Bootstrap 5, Vanilla JS |
| **Deployment** | Docker, Cloud Run / Kubernetes |

---

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- OpenAI-compatible API access (for AI features)

### Local Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/uloom-quran.git
cd uloom-quran

# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/Mac
# venv\Scripts\activate   # Windows

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Set environment variables
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your Azure OpenAI credentials

# Initialize database (downloads and populates data)
python scripts/init_database.py

# Run the server
python run.py
```

Open http://localhost:8080 in your browser.

### Docker Deployment

```bash
# Build the image (includes database schema initialization)
docker build -t uloom-quran .

# Run with environment variables
docker run -p 8080:8080 \
  -e OPENAI_API_BASE=your-api-endpoint \
  -e OPENAI_API_KEY=your-key \
  -e QDRANT_URL=your-qdrant-url \
  uloom-quran
```

**Note:** The Docker build automatically creates an empty database with the schema. To populate it with data, you can either:
1. Run the import scripts before building: `python scripts/init_database.py`
2. Mount a pre-populated database: `docker run -v /path/to/uloom_quran.db:/app/db/uloom_quran.db ...`

### Cloud Deployment

```bash
# Build and push to container registry
docker build -t uloom-quran .
docker tag uloom-quran your-registry/uloom-quran
docker push your-registry/uloom-quran

# Deploy with your preferred cloud provider
# (Cloud Run, Kubernetes, AWS ECS, etc.)
```

---

## Configuration

Create a `.env` file based on `.env.example`:

```bash
# Environment
ENV=production

# OpenAI-Compatible API (required for AI features)
OPENAI_API_BASE=https://api.openai.com/v1
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-api-key
CHAT_MODEL=gpt-4o
EMBEDDING_MODEL=text-embedding-ada-002

# Qdrant Vector Database
QDRANT_URL=http://localhost:6333

# Server
PORT=8080
```

---

## API Reference

### Quran Endpoints

```bash
# List all surahs
GET /api/quran/surahs

# Get surah details with verses
GET /api/quran/surah/{surah_id}

# Get specific verse
GET /api/quran/verse/{surah_id}/{ayah}

# Search verses
GET /api/quran/search?q=الرحمن
```

### Tafsir Endpoints

```bash
# Get all tafsirs for a verse
GET /api/tafsir/verse/{surah_id}/{ayah}

# Compare specific tafsirs
GET /api/tafsir/compare/{surah_id}/{ayah}?tafsirs=tabari,kathir,qurtubi
```

### Qiraat Endpoints

```bash
# Get qiraat differences for a verse
GET /api/qiraat/verse/{surah_id}/{ayah}

# Get all differences in a surah
GET /api/qiraat/surah/{surah_id}

# Search qiraat by keyword
GET /api/qiraat/search?q=إمالة
```

### AI Endpoints

```bash
# Semantic search (streaming)
GET /api/ai/ask/stream?q=ما معنى الصبر في القرآن

# AI health check
GET /api/ai/health
```

### Example Response

```json
{
  "type": "sources",
  "sources": [
    {
      "type": "verse",
      "reference": "2:153",
      "text": "يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اسْتَعِينُوا بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلَاةِ",
      "score": 0.89
    }
  ]
}
```

---

## Database Schema

### Core Tables

| Table | Records | Description |
|-------|---------|-------------|
| `surahs` | 114 | Chapter metadata |
| `verses` | 6,236 | Uthmani text with keys |
| `tafsir_books` | 7 | Tafsir sources |
| `tafsir_entries` | 43,652 | Commentary per verse |
| `asbab_nuzul` | 677 | Revelation contexts |
| `qurra` | 10 | Ten readers |
| `ruwat` | 20 | Twenty transmitters |
| `qiraat_variants` | 1,500+ | Reading differences |

### Vector Collections (Qdrant)

| Collection | Vectors | Description |
|------------|---------|-------------|
| `quran_verses` | 6,236 | Verse embeddings |
| `tafsir_texts` | 43,652 | Tafsir embeddings |
| `asbab_nuzul` | 677 | Asbab embeddings |
| **Total** | **50,565** | Semantic search index |

---

## Available Tafsirs

| Tafsir | Author | Era |
|--------|--------|-----|
| جامع البيان | الإمام الطبري | 310 هـ |
| تفسير القرآن العظيم | الإمام ابن كثير | 774 هـ |
| معالم التنزيل | الإمام البغوي | 516 هـ |
| الجامع لأحكام القرآن | الإمام القرطبي | 671 هـ |
| تيسير الكريم الرحمن | الشيخ السعدي | 1376 هـ |
| التحرير والتنوير | الشيخ ابن عاشور | 1393 هـ |
| الوسيط | الشيخ طنطاوي | 1431 هـ |

---

## Project Structure

```
uloom-quran/
├── src/
│   ├── api/                 # FastAPI application
│   │   ├── main.py          # App entry point
│   │   └── routes/          # API endpoints
│   ├── ai/                  # AI services
│   │   ├── config.py        # LLM & embedding config
│   │   └── services/        # RAG, embeddings, Qdrant
│   ├── scrapers/            # Data collection scripts
│   └── services/            # Business logic
├── templates/               # Jinja2 HTML templates
├── static/                  # CSS, JS assets
├── scripts/                 # Database & indexing scripts
├── db/                      # SQLite database & schemas
├── k8s/                     # Kubernetes manifests
├── Dockerfile               # Container definition
├── requirements.txt         # Python dependencies
└── .env.example             # Environment template
```

---

## Data Sources & Attribution

| Source | Content | License |
|--------|---------|---------|
| [Quran-Data](https://github.com/rn0x/Quran-Data) | Quran JSON with metadata | MIT |
| [tafseer-sqlite-db](https://github.com/Mr-DDDAlKilanny/tafseer-sqlite-db) | Arabic tafsirs | Open |
| [tafsir_api](https://github.com/spa5k/tafsir_api) | Additional tafsirs | MIT |
| [nquran.com](https://www.nquran.com/) | القراءات العشر | Educational |

---

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

### Development Setup

```bash
# Install dev dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run with hot reload
uvicorn src.api.main:app --reload --port 8080

# Run tests
pytest tests/
```

---

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

**Note**: The Quranic text and scholarly content are in the public domain. Please respect the licensing of individual data sources listed above.

---

## Acknowledgments

- The Quran open-source community for data contributions
- Classical scholars whose tafsirs are preserved digitally
- Open-source AI/ML community

---

<div align="center">

**Built with reverence for the Holy Quran**

للتواصل والاقتراحات | For feedback and suggestions

</div>
